Once around mah nah.
So this was discovered again at the
Paloma Observatory by Mike Brown and
collaborators in 2005. Mike Brown has
discovered a huge number of important
objects out there in the Kiper belt
region beyond Neptune. designated 2005
FY9
and old images back in the Paloma 1955
survey were able to pick up Mahay once
they know what they were looking for and
that's excellent because it gives a
whole 50-year arc of its orbit.
Important for understanding exactly
where it's going.
So the name comes from the creator god
in the Rapanoui mythology of Easter
Island. And that's an image carved there
of this particular deity
located out in the Ko paval orbiting.
It's uh marked in green there in an
orbit that takes uh just over 300 years
to go around 38 to 52 astronomical
units. And uh that's keeping well away
from Neptune. But again, it's tilted and
that severe tilt keeps it out of the
path of uh most of the planets around
the sun. Now, it's actually relatively
bright. It's quite a large object and
comes in at magnitude 16.2.
Now, that would have been enough for it
to have appeared in the search carried
out for Planet X by Clyde Tombbo where
Pluto was discovered in 1930. But this
huge tilt 50° taking it well away from
the ecliptic meant that it was in the
constellation of Orga where nobody would
really expect to find anything.
Physically, it's quite big. It's 1,500
kilometers in diameter. That's a quarter
of the uh diameter of Eris and Aris is
very slightly smaller than Pluto but uh
almost indistinguishable in fact.
Now it's surface seems to be according
to the spectra covered in methane and
ethane and a lot again of those red
tholins that I talk about in many of my
kiper belt lectures.
There isn't as much nitrogen and that's
interesting. less than that you find on
Pluto or Triton and no signs of an
atmosphere at this stage with a very low
temperature just 36 Kelvin. Although the
surface does show some signs that there
has been some geothermal activity,
internal heat causing material to melt
and then burst out to the surface and
recover the surface in the frozen
remains.
There is one known moon
nicknamed MK2. It doesn't have a proper
name yet. catalog number S for satellite
2015 for its year of discovery and then
one meaning the first uh satellite of
this particular object
and the photograph on the right just
picks it out there estimated at around
21,000 kilometers from Mah with a
diameter of 175 kilometers itself uh so
that's relatively large in act
and the New Horizon's probe was able to
get in on the act as well, taking a
distant image um 52 astronomical units
away right across the solar system
taking this moving picture using its
lorry long range imager and uh
it's been suggested that we send a
mission to Mahi. I think that would be
useful. It's going to take 16 years to
get there. And actually, Mah Mah would
be 52 AU from the sun. Um, the same
distance away that it was imaged here by
New Horizons.
So that's pretty much all we know about
Mahi Mah at this point and I hope that
we get to send some probes out to do a
grand tour of the Koell sometime soon
and learn a lot more from being up close
and being able to photograph and measure
these things much more accurately.
Thanks very much for listening.